From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> Over the weekend, there were two deadly
shootings on opposite sides of the
globe.
In Australia, at least 15 people were
killed on Sunday when two gunmen fired
on a crowd [music]
that was celebrating the start of
Hanukkah on a beach in Sydney.
>> This is a targeted attack on Jewish
Australians on the first day of
Hanukkah,
>> [music]
>> which should be
a day of joy.
The authorities described the shooting
as an act [music] of terrorism and said
it was carried out by a father and son.
An attack on Jewish Australians is
[music] an attack on every Australian.
It was the latest in a series of
anti-Semitic attacks [music] across
Australia. And in the hours after
Saturday's shooting, several Jewish
leaders said their warnings about
escalating violence had been ignored.
Among the victims [music] was a
Holocaust survivor who died shielding
his wife from gunfire and a rabbi
[music]
who organized the event.
Meanwhile, Today is a day that the city
of Providence [music] and the state of
Rhode Island prayed would never come. In
Providence, Rhode Island, a gunman burst
into a classroom [music]
at Brown University on Saturday and
started shooting, killing two people and
injuring nine.
Police are still searching for the
suspect. [music]
The shooting contained a particularly
American wrinkle.
For at least two [music] Brown students,
it was their second school shooting.
It's surreal, you know, already having
to have done this once. This is the
second time. Back in 2019, Mia Tretta
was shot in her stomach by a school
shooter [music]
when she was a freshman in high school
in Santa Clarita, California.
>> [music]
>> On Saturday night, Tretta, now a junior
at Brown, was studying in her dorm room
when she learned that the same thing was
happening all over again. This time at
her college.
>> got what felt like [music] hundreds of
texts saying that there is an active
shooter.
Stay inside. [music] Stay where you are.
Run, hide, fight. As Tretta told my
co-host Rachel Abrams,
>> [music]
>> she had chosen to attend Brown because
she felt a sense of safety on its
campus. And my whole sense of safety and
innocence [music] and childhood was
taken away on November 14th of 2019 at
Saugus High School.
And
>> [music]
>> trying to reclaim any of that back,
I felt like I could do that at Brown.
And now it's just been taken away again.
>> [music]
>> That's all we know for now about both of
these shootings. We'll keep you posted
as we learn more.
>> [music]
>> Today,
as Democrats debate how to counter
President Trump's aggressive crackdown
on immigration and try to win back
voters with their own vision, we look
back at why former President Biden let
the border get so out of control in the
first place and how he underestimated
just how much the problem
>> [music]
>> would come to define his presidency.
My colleague, [music] Chris Flavelle,
takes us into his investigation of how
Biden fumbled the issue of immigration
and what his party can learn from his
missteps.
>> [music]
>> It's Monday, December 15th.
Chris, you've spent much of this fall
taking a forensic look back at what many
consider to be one of the Biden
administration's biggest failures, its
immigration policy.
Under Biden, immigration at the border
surged to record numbers. Many say it
cost Democrats the election in 2024 and
set the stage for the immigration
crackdown that we're in the middle of
right now.
I want to just start by asking, why look
back on that policy in this moment, a
year after Biden left office? So, this
moment looks a whole lot like 2020,
right? You've got President Trump in the
White House
enacting really aggressive strategies in
terms of arrests and deportations of
migrants. You've got really, really
strong anger from Democrats and others
in response to those policies. And
you've got Democrats as a party trying
to figure out what position to take.
That's exactly what was happening in
2020 as Joe Biden was first campaigning
for the presidency and then deciding
after winning what to do as president.
He responded to those same pressures by
charting a really aggressively counter
campaign, being the anti-Trump. And we
saw, with the benefit of hindsight, what
the result was. Huge surge in border
encounters, massive shift in public
opinion against Democrats, and
ultimately Donald Trump returning to the
White House again on a campaign against
migrants and an open border. So, I think
the question of why did things go so
badly and what did Democrats learn is
actually really relevant right now and
is very timely because that question of
what does the party stand for and what
do Americans want for the border and
immigration remains fundamentally
unresolved. So, that's why I went back
and spent months looking at this
question of why did Biden and his close
aides make the decisions they did. And
what I found was
surprisingly, a lot of those mistakes
and blowback was preordained and warned,
and they did it anyway. Preordained how?
What do you mean by that? So, let's go
back to the summer of 2020. This you're
now approaching the height of the
campaign. Joe Biden is seeking the
presidency on a platform of being much
more welcoming towards immigrants. As
this is happening, I learned some of his
advisers began circulating a memo with a
really important warning. This memo,
which we got a copy of,
said that combined with everything else
that was going on, the pent-up demand
for migration under Trump, the economic
devastation from COVID, on top of that,
Mr. Biden's own promises and his more
welcoming tone, they warned, could
produce a really serious surge in border
crossings. And reading that language
today, it's remarkable how on the nose
it was. That memo said, quote, at the US
border, a potential surge could create
chaos and a humanitarian crisis,
overwhelm processing capacities and
imperil the agenda of the new
administration.
These warnings did not go over well with
Biden's campaign team. But these
advisers kept on raising this through
the ranks of the organization until
finally, after Biden had won election,
he got a briefing from the people who
worked on this memo. And I'm told during
that briefing that the president-elect
and Kamala Harris, the vice
president-elect, seemed to grasp that
this was a problem, but they wound up
ignoring those recommendations to change
course. Just so I make sure I understand
this. You're saying that very early on,
even before Biden won, there were
advisers who wrote this memo, who
eventually carried out this briefing,
warning about the perils of immediately
doing everything he said he would during
the campaign. But Biden and Harris
ignored them. Explain why.
>> Yeah, look, the the why is epic, right?
The first part of the why is politics.
It's worth remembering what the mood was
in 2020. This was the height of Black
Lives Matter. This was a moment in
American history when there's a real
belief, especially among Democrats, that
there was a racial reckoning underway.
And it seems as though the political
calculus was they couldn't turn their
back on that. They couldn't in that
atmosphere decide they would get a
little more aggressive on border
enforcement. That's the external why.
The internal why, the staffing choices
in the Biden administration early on,
reflected this idea that it was both
politically sound and morally necessary
to focus on how to help asylum seekers
and not to focus as much on enforcement
of the border.
So, that's the pressure he's facing. But
what does Biden himself think of this
issue? One of the really strong
through-lines from almost all of my
interviews with more than 30 people who
worked in the administration on border
and migration issues is that none of
them felt like they really understood
what Biden's own views were. In fact,
they weren't sure he held strong, clear
views and positions on immigration and
the border. There were a few things he
clearly cared about. One was he didn't
want to see
kids held in these difficult conditions
at border patrol stations.
He didn't want to be seen as doing
anything like what Trump had done in
terms of forcing migrants to remain in
Mexico while they were waiting for their
claims to be heard. But beyond that, one
of the strongest criticisms I heard was
that Biden as president did not set sort
of broad strategic goals. There was a
sense that he just didn't like talking
about this issue. One person told me
that Biden's body language changed. You
could tell he was uncomfortable when he
was talking about migration.
Fascinating. Like he was physically
uncomfortable talking about it. But it
sounds like to the extent that he was
thinking about the issue, he does have
sympathy with the side that believes
there's a moral imperative to reversing
the signature pieces of Trump's
immigration crackdown. And we know that
once in office, that's exactly what
Biden does.
So, describe that. Describe what
happened.
Yeah, Joe Biden, the first day he was in
the White House, made good on what he
had promised to do during the campaign.
He reversed almost all of Trump's
signature policies. He said he would
stop building the wall. He dramatically
reduced the scope of arrests inside the
country for migrants. He ended or tried
to end what they call the Remain in
Mexico policy, forcing migrants to wait
while their cases were heard. He stopped
sending kids [music] back over the
border under the public health rules for
COVID. And he announced that he would
put a halt on
>> [music]
>> deportations for 100 days.
Right. And what followed from signaling
a more welcoming stance toward migrants
was, [music] in fact, a huge surge at
the border.
Yeah, it was a disaster almost
immediately.
>> [music]
>> You could look at this as the first of a
series of major miscalculations that the
Biden team made on immigration, failing
to anticipate the scale of the numbers
of the people who were coming.
During the campaign and the transition,
as they prepared for these scenarios,
they said, "Let's plan around the idea
that the number of people crossing the
border once Biden is in office will
equal the worst year or the worst month
under Trump, [snorts]
and then just stay there." And the
reaction to that proposal was, "Well, it
could never get that bad." And sure
enough, by March of Biden's first year
in office, they had blown past the worst
month of the first Trump administration.
And then, not only did it stay at those
levels, it kept on rising. So, even the
people whose job was to think, "Well,
how bad could it be?" turned out to be
incredibly mistaken. They just didn't
imagine the geographic and numerical
scale of migrants who tried to reach the
border.
And when it becomes clear just how bad
it is, what's Biden's response to the
chaos? Biden and his team were focused
on responding to the immediate crisis of
children who were stuck in border patrol
stations that were not designed for
them. And so, their emphasis, their goal
in the moment was to find something to
do with these children, to move them
somewhere safe that made sense for them.
It was a real situation of trying to
react to events and just sort of
mitigate the damage, but there was no
overarching vision of, "Well, what
should the US do on the border and
securing the border?" You're describing
a sort of paralysis from the White
House. No real policy-making vision from
the top. I have to ask, who is driving
the car on this? If it's not Biden, then
who's making the calls? One of the
themes from my reporting was nobody was
driving the bus.
>> [music]
>> Over and over again, people who worked
in this told me that
part of the reason for [music] the
policy-making paralysis was there was,
during that early period, no single
person who was specifically assigned
responsibility to figure out and
implement policy on the border and
[music] immigration. In the absence of
that, you had different factions that
had different views.
>> [music]
>> You had people inside the White House
who came from the world of immigration
advocacy, generally more favorable to
migrants and asylum seekers. You had
people who came to this from more of a
national security mindset, and they
tended to emphasize enforcement of the
border.
And they couldn't agree. And above all
of that, you had this inner circle
around the president that really
thought, "You know what? There's no win
here. We're not going to get points for
talking about this. Let's just not talk
about it."
>> [music]
>> I remember I was covering these issues
at the time from Mexico City, and it was
stark how the White House didn't want to
speak to this, as you say. But everyone
else, regular people, were talking about
it. I mean, they were concerned about
what was going on.
Yeah, yeah. And look, to the degree that
there was a logic here, I'm told that
the logic was, "If we just don't talk
about it, maybe it'll resolve on its
own." And the first time I heard that
from someone who'd been involved in
these conversations, I thought, "That's
clearly crazy." But there was some
rationale behind it, because that had
happened in the past. Border surges in
2014, when Biden was vice president in
the Obama administration, surges under
the first Trump administration, the
border numbers had eventually subsided
and public attention had moved on. And
they hoped the same would happen again,
but they were wrong. These numbers did
not fade. Instead, the surge kept on
getting worse and worse.
Okay, so the White House wants to be
silent on this. They don't want to touch
the issue. Remind us, what's the
reaction among Americans, among regular
people, to the waves of migrants that
are now coming in? Yeah, the polling
data shows a real shift, and that shift
goes in the opposite direction. It shows
that more Americans are becoming worried
about illegal immigration, and the
support for migrants is falling,
seemingly in response to this perception
of chaos at the border. And now,
you would think that that polling data
would be a red flag, but it wasn't
because of still more political
miscalculations.
The administration, the people around
Biden, were worried that if they got
more aggressive on the border, on
enforcement, they risked alienating
Latino voters, who were an important
part of the coalition that brought Biden
to the White House.
And beyond that, they figured that other
American voters just wouldn't care that
much. They thought that unless you live
in a border state, this wouldn't be a
real priority for you. And sure enough,
that situation didn't last, because
eventually Texas found a way to make it
a problem for the rest of the country.
In April of 2022,
Governor Greg Abbott of Texas figures
out how to blow up this idea that Biden
could ignore the border by starting a
campaign to actually bus migrants
>> [music]
>> from Texas to Washington, D.C. And
effectively say to Biden and the
Democrats, [music]
"You cannot ignore this. We won't let
you."
We'll be right [music] back.
Describe this campaign, Chris, led by
Governor Abbott to bring this problem
directly to Democrats' doorsteps, and as
you said, make it impossible to ignore.
Remind us how that all played out.
The campaign started with one bus.
In April of 2022, there was a bus
[music] that arrived from Texas to
Washington, D.C.
Pulled up near the US Capitol, and we
know from data we got from a public
records request that that bus was
carrying 12 Venezuelans, four
Colombians, four Cubans, [music]
and four Nicaraguans. And it was the
start of what became [music]
tens of thousands of migrants
from Texas moved by bus over months and
years [music]
to New York and Washington,
Philadelphia, Chicago, Los Angeles,
[music] eventually Denver. And the
result was really remarkable. You had,
all of a sudden, mayors and governors in
democratically held areas saying, "Whoa,
this is a problem for us. This is a
problem financially. [music] We've got
to pay to find hotel rooms and shelters
these people. We've got a political
problem. Our voters don't like seeing
this surge of people on the streets."
Publicly, the Biden White House was
saying, "Come on, this is a stunt.
You're using migrants as props. This is
despicable." [music]
That was the public response, but
internally, this campaign by Abbott was
described to me as a turning point where
people who worked for the administration
began [music] to think, "You know what?
We actually have lost this debate. This
is the moment at which people are going
to turn on us."
And it pushed the White House to at
least say, "Okay, well, we can't do
nothing. What are we going to do?"
And what do they do now that they've
finally started to wake up to this?
Yeah, so in this year, 2023, the third
year that Biden is president, this
administration tried two big swings to
reduce the sense of chaos at the border.
One of them was a program to sort of
take people from a handful of countries,
Cuba, Nicaragua, Haiti, Venezuela, that
had made up a big share of border
crossers, and say, "You know what?
Instead of rushing the border, we'll
just let you in. We'll have a program
that's formal. You can apply, you can
pass a background check, and you can fly
into the country. That'll reduce
pressure at the border." That was their
first idea. And then second, they said,
"People who want to cross the border
still, okay, here's an app, CBP One, and
you have to wait and make an
appointment." Both those programs were
intended to control the flow and reduce
the sense of chaos. But by the one
metric that mattered most, which was
border crossings and border encounters,
none of this worked. The numbers from
that
final few months of 2023 are incredibly
clear. The border crossings had by this
point tripled since Biden took office.
They were reaching a quarter of a
million people per month. Just totally
without any kind of precedent. And
that's when the Biden administration
finally realized they had to get much
more serious and much more aggressive.
And what does that look like? Getting
more serious and more aggressive.
It's a few things. First of all, they
decided to get on board with Senate
talks that had begun a few months
earlier trying to look for a bipartisan
deal to give the White House authority
to effectively close the border to
asylum applications.
Also, at the very end of December,
senior Biden officials flew down to
Mexico City to meet with their Mexican
counterparts and deliver a a really
tough message to Mexico saying, "We need
you to close your own southern border
>> Right. I remember that.
>> the only way we're going to reduce
number of people getting to the US
border." And that worked. The Mexicans
took action and in response to that
pressure really aggressively cracked
down on their own border. And you see
that in the numbers. In January of 2024,
Biden's last year in office, those
numbers had fallen, but not nearly
enough. They were still facing much
higher crossings than when Biden first
came to office. And this is where the
pressure gets even more intense because
in February of 2024, that border bill
that was moving through the Senate
collapses when President Trump, then
candidate Trump, tells Republicans to
vote against it. So all of a sudden
Biden faces a real dilemma. An election
is less than a year away. That's when
they began looking at what you think of
as the nuclear option, which is finally
using the power that Biden had
unilaterally of his own authority to
effectively close the border to asylum
applications, which he did in June of
that year. And the thing that was
amazing was it basically worked. The
numbers plummeted almost right away. And
so from a policy perspective, he had
basically solved the problem.
Yeah, Chris, help me understand this. I
had this question at the time. I have
this question now. Why did it take him
so long to use executive action to do
this? You ask 20 people, you get 20
answers, right? One answer that I got
was they just didn't believe it was
right. This was not in keeping with
Democrats' principles about, you know,
respecting the dignity of migrants. They
want to respect the law. They couldn't
do it and wouldn't until they felt they
had to. Another argument is they wanted
to give Congress every possible chance
to do this on their own and only when it
was crystal clear Congress wouldn't do
it. Only then would Biden do this
himself. Whatever it was, I think in
hindsight what's clear is it didn't
work. They waited too long to get any
meaningful benefit from doing this.
Explain that. Where are voters on this?
Why didn't it work? Why didn't it
convince people that they were on the
right track?
Yeah, there's two ways of thinking about
why it didn't work. One is just the
calendar was so unforgiving, right? At
this point you're 5 months away from
election day.
Voters, to the extent they've been
paying attention, have lived through 3
and 1/2 years almost of border crisis.
So that idea, that perception that Biden
and Democrats favor open borders is
really cemented by this point. But the
other argument is
even after taking the step,
they wouldn't brag about it. They did
not go out and say, "Look what we did."
And I'm told by senior Democrats that
view persisted, that view of if we're
talking about immigration and talking
about the border, they're losing. And so
they decided not to focus on it even at
the end once they'd effectively solved
the problem. That inherent foundational
skittishness remained.
I want to just talk about everything
you've told us. It is really hard to
overstate the significance of it. The
significance of the fallout of Biden's
miscalculations on immigration.
Obviously, it led to Trump's return to
office in part and that has totally
transformed the country.
But there is this potentially deeper,
longer lasting impact that you point to
in your reporting, which is that it
actually helped lead to this rightward
shift in the American public's views of
immigration.
Can you describe that for me and just
help me understand how durable you think
that shift is? The honest answer, of
course, is no one knows how durable that
shift is. There is polling data that has
come in since Donald Trump came back to
the White House showing that some of the
intense unease about immigration that
really spiked by the end of the Biden
years, that unease has softened a bit
and those numbers have receded to sort
of the pre-Biden levels. But what that
doesn't account for is anecdotally and
based on conversations with people who
work on this,
there seems to be a real sense of of
lingering anger among American voters,
Democrats, Republicans,
the sense that people remain
collectively a little bit scarred by
what they saw when Biden was president.
The question you're pushing on is are
Democrats going to swing the pendulum
back to more permissive immigration
policies now that there is a backlash
against Trump?
Or are they going to look back at what
Biden did and say, "Look, these are
mistakes that we don't want to repeat."
And I mean, you talked to these folks.
Do you have any clarity on that?
I see no evidence from the reporting I
did that Democrats have answered that
question. I I don't get the sense that
they have figured out what the lessons
are from the Biden years and and what
they should say on immigration going
forward.
And I think the challenge that Democrats
face is actually the same challenge
facing Republicans, which is being
squeezed between two extremes, right? We
know that the Trump style approach of
extremely aggressive crackdowns can work
at reducing border crossings and it can
satisfy some portion of Americans, but
there's a real pushback, right? It sure
seems like many American voters are
uneasy about the severity of the Trump
approach.
>> Yep. On the other hand, as we saw in the
last 4 years, a lot of Americans are
uneasy with the perception of open
borders. And the challenge for moderate
Democrats or moderate Republicans
will be trying to find a third approach.
But even if they can figure out what
that is from a policy perspective, can
they get American voters to accept it?
>> [music]
>> And maybe the room for new ideas,
something closer to a more welcoming
approach, is
for the foreseeable future closed
politically [music]
because of that lingering anger from the
Biden years. And so maybe the real
legacy of Joe Biden on immigration
>> [music]
>> is that people's willingness to give
immigrants the benefit of the doubt or
even give Democrats the benefit of the
doubt [music] is, at least for now,
gone.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Well, Chris,
thank you. Thank you.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right [music] back.
[music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
Syrian and American officials confirmed
that a gunman who killed two US Army
soldiers and an American interpreter on
Saturday
>> [music]
>> was a member of Syria's security forces
who was set to be dismissed for his
extremist views.
>> [music]
>> The attack, which officials said was
carried out by ISIS, claimed the first
US casualties in Syria since the
country's strongman leader [music]
Bashar al-Assad was ousted from power a
year ago.
President Trump has vowed to retaliate.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Mary
Wilson, Nina Feldman, Jessica Chung,
Astha [music] Chaturvedi, and Eric
Krupke with help from Claire Aten
Skidder.
It was edited by MJ Davis [music] Lynn
and Patricia Willens. Contains music by
Dan Powell, Pat McCusker, Alicia B.
Eatu, and Marion Lozano and was
engineered by Chris [music] Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.
>> [music]